[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The Giza Plateau--
this infamous,
rectangular-shaped area
overlooks the Nile Valley and
is only 5 miles from Cairo.
Here, people come from
all over the world
to gaze upon the
pyramids and the Sphinx.
But below these magnificent
structures lies a slew
of myths, legends, and
documented evidence
of an underworld so vast
the human mind cannot even
conceptualize its existence.
What could lie below
the Giza Plateau?
Could it be an ancient city?
A military base?
Or the remnants of the gods?
Is it possible
that whatever could
be buried below the surface
of this ancient area
is the key to understanding
the very beginnings of humanity
on this planet?
Gregg Braden points to
the first documented
source of its existence.
>> Some of the earliest credible
accounts of the Giza Plateau
and what could be underneath
the Giza Plateau come from
the Greek historian Herodotus.
It was during his life
in the 4th century--
approximately 4th century BCE--
when he compiled a record
that he called "The Histories"
of ancient civilizations,
ancient cultures,
ancient technologies
that predate his time
by thousands and
thousands of years.
And it was in his volume, "The
Histories," that Herodotus
began to talk about Giza.
And underneath Giza,
beyond what the eye
can see with the pyramids and
the Sphinx and the temples
during his time, he speculated
that there were passages.
There were chambers.
There were pathways.
Some of them were natural,
created by fast-moving water
under the limestone
of the Giza Plateau.
Some of them were enhanced
by humans at a time
when this part of the world had
a very, very different climate
than what we have right now.
Herodotus believed that it
was in this location that
the remnants of the
ancient civilization--
such as Atlantis--
were able to store the records,
the histories, the writings,
and the examples of technologies
from their time that
would be preserved for
future generations following
Herodotus.
Up until the 20th century, there
were additional speculations.
Maps were drawn.
Images were created
of what was believed
to be underneath the
plateau without actually
seeing these chambers
and these temples.
Two men, Henry
Salt and Giovanni,
were able to survey the area
with the technology that
was available in their time.
And looking at the geographic
anomalies, the topology,
it led them to a place
not at the plateau,
not directly where
the pyramids are,
the Sphinx is,
but on the edge of the plateau
to a little known site that
is now called the
Tomb of the Birds.
>> Could this be one of the
entrances to the underworld?
>> We know that the Tomb
of the Birds was venerated
as the place of a bird god.
We don't know what god, but
it was most likely Thoth,
the keeper of the
hidden records,
suggesting that this is the
entrance that will eventually
take us to the Hall
of Records themself.
But what we do know is that
overhead radar images that
were taken by satellites
very clearly tell us
that there is a
passage that goes
all the way from the northeast
corner of the plateau,
in the area of the
Tomb of the Birds,
all the way to the
second pyramid.
>> Although there seems to be
documented evidence of the Tomb
of the Birds, the actual
location of its entrance was
lost to the curious until April
2008 when author and researcher
Andrew Collins picked up the
breadcrumbs of Henry Salt.
>> Myself and a Egyptological
researcher by the name of Nigel
Skinner Simpson decided that we
would try and find Giza's cave
underworld.
And it took a while,
but finally we
found two vital
pieces of evidence.
One related to the
Colonel Howard Vyse,
who, with his engineer
friend, John Shae Perring,
investigated a previously
unknown tomb in the exact area
that we were
interested in, which
was the northwest
corner of the plateau.
So we investigated
this site in 2007.
And, you know, it wasn't
easy to get in there.
But we investigated it
and couldn't find anything
initially.
And then, shortly after
I returned from Egypt,
we found these old
diary notes that
had been written in 1817 by
the British Consul-General
at the time, who was Henry
Salt. And he employed
the services of explorers.
And one of these was the
Italian Giovanni Caviglia.
And Caviglia, for
instance, worked with Salt
uncovering the sand
around these things.
But they also
investigated the very area
that we were interested in.
And these diary notes
talked about them,
going into a cave system
and penetrating it
for several hundred yards
and finding in there hidden
chambers.
And we realized that
this was exactly
the same location that
we'd previously been to,
that we were beginning to
refer to under the name
the Tomb of Birds.
So we went back
there in April 2008.
And this time, we looked harder,
and we found a small crack
leading into this cave chamber,
this huge, massive cave
chamber.
And we then began to
explore and realized
that this was leading
into a cave system that
led towards the second pyramid.
But this was a very hazardous,
very dangerous place.
Not only could you
fall down crevasses,
there were rocks everywhere,
but there were also
bats, thousands
of them, and also
spiders, including some that
were very clearly poisonous.
And we penetrated deeper and
deeper into this cave system
until the air became so bad
that it started to affect us.
And at this point, we came out.
And I wrote everything up,
but we reported it immediately
to the Egyptian
authorities so that they
were aware of everything
that was happening.
And it was a strange
story, because not only
did they initially deny that
there was a cave system there
and claimed that we'd simply
gone into somewhere that
was already known about, but
just a few months after this,
the head of the Supreme Council
of Antiquities, Dr. Zahi
Hawass, was seen going
into the site archives
and saying that it was the
best experience that he'd
had at Giza.
I believe that the
caves that we discovered
is just the beginning of a huge,
great underground system that
permeates a large part
of the Plateau at Giza.
>> If this is true, why haven't
there been any more discoveries
since 2008?
It's important to
note, in 2010, just two
years after its discovery,
access to the tomb
became blocked by a metal gate.
Could authorities
be trying to hide
what seems to be a massive
underground system?
>> The one thing that we know
about Giza is that there is
a huge cave system there that
obviously has been rediscovered
only recently.
But radar images taken
overhead from satellites
show us that these caves go
beneath the second pyramid
and that they likely go into
other parts of the plateau,
as well, possibly even
beneath the Great Pyramids.
And that tells us
that somewhere here
could be a series
of hidden chambers
that were actually hewn by
either the domestic Egyptians
or perhaps even from
a much earlier age,
by the so-called elder
civilization that may well
have existed at Giza
as early as 10,500 BC.
>> If what Andrew stumbled
upon was indeed an entrance
to the underworld, could
there be other entrances?
Some experts believe that the
Sphinx might hold the key.
>> The hunt for some kind
of hidden chamber beneath
the Plateau at Giza really went
into extra drive, if you like,
with the psychic
readings of Edgar Cayce.
Now, he is known as
America's sleeping prophet.
He was born in
1877, died in 1945.
And essentially
what he would do is
he would give
these readings that
would help diagnose
people's illnesses,
and often these past lives
took place in ancient Egypt.
In 1933, he started
talking about something
called the Hall of Records.
And what he said was that
this was the repository of all
of the knowledge and wisdom
that had been brought
from the lost
continent of Atlantis
by the survivors, the
Atlantean survivors,
been brought into
Egypt and stored
within this hidden chamber and
that this was located somewhere
beneath the Plateau at Giza.
He thought it was
accessed via an entrance
somewhere in the region
of the Great Sphinx.
>> When Edgar Cayce's
foundation, the ARE,
were exploring, it happened
that they were actually doing
the seismic exploration during
a time that I was there with
another group.
And I had the
opportunity to see.
In that time, it was a
relatively primitive form
of seismic exploration.
They took a very large man
with a very large sledgehammer,
and he literally pounded
onto a steel plate that
was on the surface
of the desert,
creating the shockwaves that
would go into the Earth.
And as they came
back up, if they
went through an empty space,
they would travel faster.
If they went through solid
rock, they would travel slower.
That was registered on a
graph, and the graph clearly
showed that there is a chamber
where Edgar Cayce had predicted
it would be found under
the paws of the Sphinx.
Where this gets
really interesting
is that the chamber appeared
to have stuff in it.
What is unknown
is whether or not
that stuff is the collapse of
the ceiling into the chamber
itself or if the
chamber, in fact,
is intact and is
full of artifacts
from an ancient, highly advanced
civilization that Cayce talked
about in his readings.
>> We all have heard about the
explanations of Edgar Cayce
talking about the Hall of
Records underground the Sphinx.
But we usually take the
explanations of the visions
that we all have very literally.
But when we are
talking about halls,
it's not about a big hall like
in our times or in Roman times.
For the Atlantean
civilization, it
was about how to
manage the information.
It was not only
about construction.
It's also about being concrete.
They are the halls and
the past of records,
and those records are water.
And all you have
underground the Giza Plateau
is water, which is the tool that
they used to have the records.
>> Whatever might
be below the Sphinx,
is it possible the foundation
ARE has found a hidden chamber
under the Sphinx?
Or could this just
be another entrance
to what lies below
the Giza Plateau,
possibly even connecting back
to a massive water system?
Another mysterious possible
entrance on the plateau
is the Osiris Shaft.
>> The Greek historian Herodotus
visited the Giza Plateau
in around 450 BC.
And he clearly spoke to
the priests and the elders
who were looking after
the different tombs
and the pyramids.
And according to
his story, he said
that the builder of
the Great Pyramid
was Cheops, who we
know today as Khufu.
And what he said was that the
pharaoh himself wasn't actually
buried inside the pyramid
but that he was actually
placed within a tomb that
was located on an island
deep beneath the plateau and
that, around this island,
water would flow in from
the Nile to surround it.
But what is so interesting
about this account
is that the place
that he describes
matches almost exactly the
so-called Osiris Shaft.
This is a very mysterious
underground structure
that's accessed from an entrance
beneath the causeway linked
to the second pyramid that's
on three different levels.
And at the bottom,
the lowest level,
is an island where water
would come in from the Nile,
and there is a tomb and
a sarcophagus set down
into that rocky island.
And it matches exactly
what Herodotus tells us.
>> If Herodotus was the first
account of an underground
labyrinth below the Giza Plateau
and his depiction of the tomb
happens to exist, what
else can be verified?
In 1997, Gregg Braden was
allowed special access
to the Osiris Shaft after
a letter was provided
by the President Hosni Mubarak.
>> And one of the first places
that I was allowed to go was
under the causeway between the
Great Sphinx and the middle
pyramid into an area
that, at that time,
was only recently opened
and was the subject of a lot
of speculation-- the
tomb of the Osiris.
And it was said
that this tomb was
one of the passageways that led
to this underground labyrinth.
We were led to a
locked iron gate.
The gate was opened.
We went inside.
And I had the
opportunity to climb
down through a series
of ladders, for me,
only down to the third level
under the surface of the Giza
Plateau.
And it was at that level that
the water table prevented us
from going any further.
Now, there is a
sarcophagus that is there.
And many people believe that
that was the end of the tomb
and that sarcophagus underwater
was holding the body of Osiris.
But what our guides told us
that their grandfather had told
them was that that sarcophagus
is a false sarcophagus.
It doesn't hold a body.
When you open the
sarcophagus, it
reveals the ladder
that goes down
into the deeper levels of
this complex underneath Giza.
Now, as a geologist, I find
this really interesting,
because when we talk
about this complex,
was it built before the
pyramids and the Sphinx or were
the pyramids and the Sphinx
built and then these tunnels
were carved later?
And if so, how
would that be done?
The geology of the Giza Plateau
is primarily sedimentary--
a lot of limestone and dolomite.
These are sedimentary--
relatively soft sedimentary
deposits that are the
result of a lot of water.
And the water also can carve
the tunnels and the chambers.
And I believe this
is what we're seeing
is a natural system of
tunnels and chambers
that nature has
created that have
been enhanced by humans in
times of antiquity, in the past.
>> Although Gregg couldn't
go beyond the third level,
Sonja Grace was able
to go beyond the veil.
And she explains
that the Osiris Shaft
has many more layers and rooms
that have yet to be discovered.
>> When I spirit traveled back
to Egypt and there were these
guards standing there in
front of Osiris' Shaft,
they allowed us to pass, and
we started descending down
the ladder.
There's standing water
in that third chamber.
But when I was there, it
was ornately decorated.
It was very beautiful
with all kinds
of hieroglyphs and statues.
There were actually
carved statues down there.
We went through
this hallway, and we
went into this huge room.
And it was filled with gold.
I mean, it was spectacular.
It was huge, high ceilings,
and there were statues
of all the Egyptian gods.
There was gold and
vases and statues,
all these things
filling the room.
And there were papyrus
rolls, all kinds
of rolls of papyrus
that had ancient text.
And they told me it was the
ancient text of Atlantis
and that this was the library
that's underneath the Sphinx.
And then we went up a shaft,
climbing up the ladder.
And we ended up in
the cavern that's
at the base in the back of
the Sphinx, underground.
Everything is reflected above
ground that is underground.
And the reason the
pyramids were built
is to reflect that there is,
in fact, pyramids underground.
The second chamber is the seven
sarcophagi and the seven deaths
that you go through.
The third chamber is the
chamber of the initiates.
It's down further.
Then we have the fourth chamber.
That's the great
hall, the library.
Then we have the
fifth chamber, which
is the first cavern
under the Sphinx.
The sixth is the second cavern.
And the seventh is the
pyramid that's underground.
>> Could there really be seven
levels underneath the Osiris
Shaft and the Sphinx?
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> In July 1911, archaeologist
George Reisner launched
excavations and spoke
about them to the press.
He was very reputable
and had been working
on the Giza Plateau for years.
He wanted to focus on and
dig around the Sphinx.
In March of the
following year, 1912,
he claimed to have
discovered a hole
in the Sphinx's head, a
passage which he went through.
He always communicated
via the American press
and used them to announce that
the passages went much further
away and may harbor treasure.
March of the following year
is when the story really
takes off.
In March 1913, several magazines
covered Reisner's discoveries,
explaining that he went
much deeper into the Sphinx
and discovered a millennia-old
city buried underground
and a solar temple that was
at least 6,000 years old.
This temple was said to have the
link to the Temple of Solomon.
It was extraordinary,
and many magazines
spoke of his
discoveries in 1913.
It's interesting
that Reisner spoke
of an underground city
beneath the Giza Plateau,
of a buried solar temple,
even of small pyramids.
>> Reisner wasn't the only
one to publish such work.
A journalist, Paul White,
published an expedition
that happened in 1978 on the
Giza Plateau using SIRA radar.
Chambers were found, and
a crew with a film camera
explored its depths.
White explains that the
film was shown in Australia
to a few people
and featured what
looked to be complete
with hydraulic underground
waterways, massive chambers,
and a large cathedral
with enormous statues.
The video, however, has
since been suppressed.
If this is true that
buried cities, passageways,
and possibly
pyramids and temples
existed below the surface of the
Sphinx, what was their purpose?
Is it possible these
discoveries are
just the beginning of
something even more mysterious?
>> So, basically, the picture
of how this works is like
the place where a computer
stores information.
It's like this green
with the copper
and gold and these shiny dots.
Basically the pyramids
are like those shiny dots,
and all the grid around through
where the information goes
through is the water below.
So, basically, the water
below and all the chambers
below the pyramids
and the temples,
they are the ones
sharing the information,
bringing the information,
channeling the information.
And the pyramids are
like the computers
that spread that information.
This is why every
pyramid is connected
to the grid in the underground.
And as you have shaft
for the water below,
you have shafts in the
chambers above to connect
with the invisible
links in the sky,
which is the connection
with the stars.
That would be the ether.
So water and ether would
be the two different ways
of information that are stored
in the center of the pyramid
so you could create the grid.
So they work together.
It's like a whole
system, like a computer.
From Giza Plateau, they started
to build the whole network,
not only in the
invisible connection
through the atmosphere
and to the magnetic field,
but also in the underground.
So they started to build
this whole big network
in the underground with tunnels
that go from here to Israel,
from there to Iraq to Turkey.
And from Turkey, which is the
head of the snake, the most
important place from where all
the energy spreads physically
around the world, they started
to create all this grid
towards Europe and India.
So, for sure, all the
tunnels that some people know
in Romania and some
other parts of Europe,
they're all linked and
connected because it
was all a great grid.
>> Could there be a massive
underground grid that spans
across Egypt, India, and Europe?
It just so happens that, in the
Bucegi Mountains of Romania,
there is what is referred
to as the Romanian Sphinx.
This monument faces
north, and legends
of tunnels that hold evidence
of a different kind of Hall
of Records have been
told here for decades.
Elders from this
region have talked
about three tunnels, one
that goes to inner Earth,
another that goes to
Tibet, and the third that
goes all the way to Giza.
Could this be the connection
to the Giza Plateau?
If this is true, who or
what might have built this?
Anton Parks returns back to
the Sumerian and Edfu texts
for answers.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> I am specialized in Sumer
and have translated texts that
speak of an ancient war
between the Anunna, the Nungal,
and beings from space.
The Anunna gods came
to Earth in the midst
of a war against beings
from the universe.
Tablet AO4153 says
the exact same thing,
that the Anunna gods came to
Earth and were unable to leave.
They were blocked here.
When you start digging in the
Egyptian and Sumerian texts,
both the Egyptian
and Sumerian gods
were at war against other gods.
The war prevented
them from leaving.
The Urma, planner
gods whose mission
was to preserve life on Earth,
went to war against the Anunna
when they came to Earth
as a belligerent force.
The Urma, which means
great warriors in Sumerian,
were lion-headed
extraterrestrials.
They can be
recognized in Sekhmet,
the lion-headed goddess, who
is the warrior form of Hathor.
The famous lion-headed
Sphinx could also
be related to the Urma, who,
according to my research,
lived on the Giza Plateau.
They lived there in
underground bases.
I think they themselves
built gigantic infrastructure
in which to live.
They left when the
Anunna arrived and handed
over the Giza Plateau
to Osiris' clan, which
is why they settled there.
I noticed the potential
presence of the Urma
in the Edfu text 329330.
It describes a battle
against Set during which
he attacks Atlantis yet again.
Among those helping
Osiris battle
Set's forces are
lion-headed warriors.
It's interesting to see a
potential trace of the Urma
in the Edfu text.
>> The lineage of
the cat people--
actually, they were
instrumental as demigods
in shaping that society.
And when Atlantis fell, Sekhmet
is the only one that remained.
The rest of them went
back to their home,
and Sekhmet stayed
because she was
so dedicated to her
magicians, to her offspring.
And the Egyptian
gods adopted her
and made her a part
of their group.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> The warrior appearance of the
Urma can, to a certain extent,
be recognized in Sekhmet, the
warrior counterpart of Hathor,
the goddess of love connected
to Osiris' sister wives,
Isis and Nephthys.
Hathor's warrior
form is Sekhmet.
She is also connected
to the Great Flood.
It is absolutely possible
to link Sekhmet to the Urma.
>> Cats are one of the oldest
animistic symbols in the world.
There are many tribal
peoples in Africa
that still have cults
surrounding shapeshifting
beings that can transform
from a cat into a human
and back into a cat again.
And very clearly, Egypt itself,
which is in Northeast Africa,
was also very much influenced
by these African traditions.
And it is for this
reason that there
are a large number of
goddesses, in particular,
that all seem to have the head
of either a lion or a panther.
>> If these beings were here for
hundreds of thousands of years
before even the arrival
of the Enki Osiris clan,
why were they here?
And what was the purpose of the
underground structure at Giza?
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> I think that the purpose of
the underground Urma base was
to hide great numbers
of warriors and vessels.
The Sumerian and
Egyptian texts explain
that the gods used flying
ships or fire ships.
They needed a place to
hide them and did so
in the numerous caves
of the Giza Plateau
as well as in the mountains,
where ships are believed
to have landed, and the desert.
The goal was to hide
as much equipment
and as many people as possible.
According to my research,
the Giza Plateau
is made up of
approximately seven levels.
The Egyptian funerary
texts give the same number.
For example, an
engraving at Karnak
shows a door divided
into seven parts that
would symbolize the different
levels of the underground kigal
of the Giza Plateau.
According to my research
in certain excerpts
of the funerary texts, the
first level is for prisoners.
The gods lived in the
kigal, and the first level
was for prisoners.
People of the court also
lived on this level.
Some ships were
probably there, as well.
The second level housed
gardens in the god's flock.
Some parts bathed in the
underground Nile, which
is regularly mentioned
in funerary texts,
such as that of the Ambda Reed.
This portion of the
Nile runs underground,
parallel to the main
river from the delta
until Oshawa, at least.
It's huge and very long.
From the north to Oshawa it
is said to be full of caves.
The third level housed
the hybrids, Egyptian gods
coupled with humans.
And this level was dedicated
to their offspring, the hybrids
that were half god, half human.
Humans may also
have lived there.
The fourth housed the
Egyptian god royalty.
The entire royal court
lived on the fourth level.
There is something important
to remember about the seven
levels of the kigal.
They weren't organized like
the floors of a building.
Some levels intermingled.
Some bathed in the
underground Nile.
They are not organized
homogeneously and cannot be
compared to those of a building.
The underground was huge.
The caves were originally
sculpted by water
from the Mediterranean, which
engulfed Egypt and the plateau
on several occasions.
The technology that allowed
all the levels to breathe
was on the fifth
level of the kigal.
There must have been a
technology that created
an artificial atmosphere.
The deeper you go
into Earth, the harder
it becomes to breathe.
Engineers in charge of running
the system also lived there.
The sixth level housed
the arsenal and probably
the gods' vessels.
The last level, the
seventh, was not very big
and housed the power generator.
It supplied the different levels
with all the power they needed.
In addition to the
artificial atmosphere,
there was light streaming in
from the ceiling of each level.
The generator on the sixth level
allowed the simulation of a sky
on each level.
>> If this is true, what
happened after the Urma left
and the Osiris clan took over?
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> When the Anunna
settled the Earth,
the Nungal established
residency at the Giza Plateau.
To summarize for
those who don't know,
the Anunna are led by
Enlil, set to the Egyptians,
while the Nungal, the great
princes, are led by Enki, i.e.
Osiris.
After the departure
of Urma, Osiris
took over the premises,
which progressively
became the residence of
the Shemsis, or the Nungal.
>> Some experts believe the clan
of Osiris was able to create
massive amounts of energy around
the Giza Plateau once he took
over the base.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> The Egyptian relationship
with energy is embodied
in the pillar of djed, a very
specific hieroglyph that is
often associated with water.
There's a lot of water flowing
underneath the Giza Plateau
in the underground Nile.
The ancient Egyptians,
the gods, could
have generated incredible power
by harnessing the interaction
between water and the djed.
Representations of the
djed often feature water.
It happens very frequently.
I think they were
able to generate
a shield around the Giza
site that could protect them
from attacks.
They were frequently
attacked by the Set's forces,
the infamous Anunna, both at
the plateau, where they lived,
and in Atlantis.
>> If our explorers could
descend past some of the first
levels of the Giza Plateau to
verify that, indeed, large,
deep underground military
bases were created along with
networks spanning
across India and Europe,
what would we be able to find?
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> I think the Egyptian
authorities know exactly what
is underneath the Giza Plateau,
which explains why, officially,
we're not allowed to go
without authorization.
Although I do not believe
that any English or American
Egyptologist has ever
obtained the authorization
to go digging there, officially
there is nothing there.
In the 1990s, Zahi
Hawass regularly
allowed the ground of the
plateau to be surveyed.
He would stop the
research as soon
as a trace or echoes
of cavities were found.
I don't think that there
is a will to really know
what lies beneath the plateau.
The last time I went
to Giza was in 2007.
Around both the great
and the second pyramids,
there were electrical cables
in the great pit running
along the walls and
into the ground.
The diameter of the electric
cables was incredible.
They weren't there to power
the sound and light show
that evening.
They had a different purpose.
I think there are excavations.
The network is huge.
As I've mentioned, it is
made up of seven levels.
I imagine they found
materials and maybe traps.
If the gods lived
there, they must
have left behind traps and
sealed certain structures.
There might also be
pockets of gas, which would
seem likely the deeper you go.
So much could be
found if we were
allowed to explore the site.
For me, it's very
clear that there
must be monumental
infrastructure
with tremendous stones
like those of the Osirion.
There might also be
unknown equipment
of extraterrestrial origin.
This is what could
probably be found.
>> Is it possible that below
the Giza Plateau is an ancient
military base with
unfathomable technology created
by a forgotten race whose face
seems to grace our presence
in the form of the Sphinx,
reminding us daily that below
its feet lies not only
the secrets of Atlantis
but the origins of
the universe itself?
With so many entrances
to this labyrinth,
will we ever be
able to dig deeper?
Will we ever be able to
go beyond the first level
of the Tomb of the Birds?
And will the tomb of Osiris
ever be explored enough
to reach the Sphinx?
Only time will tell
when a piece of our past
will reveal itself and
invite us into its womb,
into the Earth, where history
keeps all her secrets.